# DEPARTMENTAL INTERPRETATION AND PRACTICE NOTES NO. 13 (REVISED) PROFITS TAX
# TAXATION OF INTEREST RECEIVED 

These notes are issued for the information and guidance of taxpayers and their  authorised  representatives. They have no binding force and do not affect a person's right of objection and appeal to the Commissioner, the Board of Review or the Courts.

These notes replace those issued in October 1996.

LAU MAK Yee-ming, Alice Commissioner of Inland Revenue

## CONTENT

|                                                              |   Paragraph |
|--------------------------------------------------------------|-------------|
| Introduction                                                 |           1 |
| Interest earned by persons other than financial institutions |           2 |
| Profits tax on interest earned by financial institutions     |           8 |
| Double taxation relief                                       |          12 |

## INTRODUCTION

Interest  tax  was  repealed  with  effect  from  the  year  of  assessment commencing  on  1  April  1989.    Since  then,  only  interest  received  by  or accrued to a person carrying a trade, profession or business in Hong Kong is chargeable to tax under profits tax. This Practice Note sets out the Department's view on the taxation of interest received.

## INTEREST  EARNED  BY  PERSONS  OTHER  THAN  FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

2. Only  interest  arising  in  or  derived  from  Hong  Kong  is  liable  to profits tax.        For many years, the Department has taken the view that for the purpose of determining the place where interest arises or is derived from, it is the  location  of  the  originating  cause  that  almost  invariably  determines  the source.    In essence, the place of derivation of interest is the place where the credit was provided to the borrower, i.e. the place where the funds from which the interest is derived were provided to the borrower, commonly known as the 'provision of credit' test. This view is based on the decisions in Commissioner of Inland Revenue (NZ) v. N V Philips Gloeilampenfabrieken, 10 ATD 435 and CIR v. Lever Brothers &amp; Unilever Ltd (1946), 14 SATC 1 .
3. If the originating cause is situated in Hong Kong, the source of the interest  is  in  Hong  Kong,  irrespective  of  the  currency  in  which  the  loan  is denominated, the place of residence of the debtor or the place where the debtor employs the capital.    Whilst the emphasis is generally placed on the provision of the credit, in some situations, such as mortgages, the originating cause may well  be  the  mortgage  itself.    In  addition,  interest  has  a  Hong  Kong  source where  it  forms  an  integral  part  of  a  trading  transaction  carried  out  in  Hong Kong,  e.g.  where  a  Hong  Kong  manufacturer  sells  his  goods  to  an  overseas buyer on extended credit terms.    In such situations, the interest is just as much a part of the profit as the trading profit itself and also arises in Hong Kong, e.g. BR  20/75,  IRBRD,  vol.  1,  184 and Studebaker  Corporation  of  Australasia Limited v. C of T, 29 CLR 225.
4. It  should  also  be  noted  that  the  'provision  of  credit  test'  is  not applicable where the loans are not simple loans of money.    The Privy Council

held in the case of Orion Caribbean Limited v. CIR 4 HKTC 432 that where the taxpayer earned its profits by borrowing and lending of money, the proper test to determine the source of the profits was the operation test, i.e. 'one looks to see what the taxpayer has done to earn the profit in question and where he has done  it'. In  the  case  of  a  money lending  business,  the  taxpayer's  business would normally encompass a broader range of activity, including the borrowing and/or lending of money. For this type of business, the Department will apply the  operation  test  instead  of  the  provision  of  credit  test  in  determining  the source of the interest income.

5. The question of whether the passive receipt of interest income by a company constitutes  the  carrying  on  of  a  business  arises  occasionally.    The Department's  long-standing  view  on  the  law  in  this  area  is  governed  by  the decisions in IRC v. Korean Syndicate Ltd, 12 TC 181; CIR v. The South Behar Railway  Co  Ltd.,  12  TC  657 and American  Leaf  Blending  Co  Sdn  Bhd  v. Director-General  of  Inland  revenue  [1978]  STC  561. The  current  position is -
2. y the mere receipt of interest by a company does not constitute the carrying on of a business;
3. y actions  that  go  beyond  'mere  passive  acquiescence'  may constitute the carrying on of a business;
4. y a period of inactivity does not rebut the fact that a company is still carrying on business.
6. In  the  case  of CIR  v.  Bartica  Investment  Ltd,  4  HKTC  129 ,  a company placed deposits with financial institutions as security for back-to-back loans, held investments and purchased shares in a listed Hong Kong company. It was held that the company carried on a business in Hong Kong.    Cheung J. decided  that,  without  having  to  rely  on  its  investment  holding  and  share purchasing  activities,  the  company's  principal  on-going  activity  of  placing deposits and furnishing securities was, of itself, sufficient to constitute carrying on  a  business.    In  other  words,  the  company's  activities  had  gone  beyond 'mere  passive  acquiescence'.    The  case  turned  on  its  own  facts  and  can  be distinguished  from  situations  involving  the  mere  passive  receipt  of  interest. The decision does not change the Department's interpretation and application of the law.

7. Section 15(1)(g) deems interest received in respect of the funds of a business carried on in Hong Kong by a person, other than a corporation, to be receipts arising in Hong Kong from a business carried on in Hong Kong and chargeable  to  profits  tax.    Interest  is  therefore  subject  to  profits  tax  on  the same basis as all  other  income  received  by  a  business.    In  addition,  interest received  in  respect  of  monies  held  on  trust  e.g.  interest-bearing  clients'  trust accounts that, by agreement with the clients, is retained by a trade, profession or  business  is  also  subject  to  profits  tax.    Such  income  is  received  as consideration  for  services  rendered  and  consequently  arises  in  or  is  derived from that business in Hong Kong and is chargeable to profits tax under section 14, e.g. CIR v. Messrs. Lau, Wong &amp; Chan, Solicitors, 2 HKTC 470 .

## PROFITS TAX ON INTEREST EARNED BY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

8. The Inland Revenue Ordinance (IRO) was amended in 1978 by the addition of section 15(1)(i).    This subsection deems interest income received by or accrued to financial institutions through or from their businesses in Hong Kong to be profits arising in or be derived from a trade, profession or business carried on in Hong Kong notwithstanding that the provision of credit may have been outside of Hong Kong.    The deeming provision applies only to interest income  not  otherwise  chargeable  to  profits  tax.    The  Board  of  Review  in D7/84, IRBRD, vol. 2, 58, held that notwithstanding that the provision of credit was  outside  Hong  Kong,  interest  derived  by  a  financial  institution  was chargeable under section 14, the basic charging provision, because the interest arose from the financial institution's operations in Hong Kong . The decision of the Board of Review is in line with the decision by the Privy Council in Orion Caribbean Limited v. CIR 4 HKTC 432 mentioned in paragraph 4.
9. The main features of section 15(1)(i) are -
- A financial institution is defined as -
    - an authorised institution within the meaning of section 2 of the Banking Ordinance; and
    - an associated corporation of an authorised institution which would have been liable to be authorised as such an institution  under  the  Banking  Ordinance  had  it  not  been exempt under the relevant provisions.
- Only interest arising through, or from the carrying on of, the business in Hong Kong is subject to profits tax.
- The  provision  of  the  credit  outside  Hong  Kong  will  not,  of itself, take the interest received outside of the charge to profits tax.
10. Whether interest arises from the carrying on of a business in Hong Kong by a financial institution will be a question of fact to be determined by the totality of the circumstances in each case.    Modern international banking is  a  highly  complex  business  and  circumstances  will  vary  between  financial institutions.    At one end of the spectrum will be financial institutions carrying on business solely in Hong Kong and which, having accepted deposits here, use part of the proceeds to purchase foreign interest-bearing securities or advance loans  to  overseas  borrowers.    Unquestionably,  the  whole  of  its  profits  will arise  from  its  Hong  Kong  business.    At  the  other  end  of  the  spectrum  are situations where the operations carried out in Hong Kong are confined merely to  entering  a  transaction  in  the  books  of  account.    Clearly,  it  could  not  be claimed  that  the  profits  on  such  transactions  arise  from  the  carrying  on  of business  in  Hong  Kong.    Conversely,  though,  if  operations  of  substance relating to a transaction are carried out in Hong Kong the profits tax liability cannot  be  escaped  merely  by  entering  the  transactions  in  the  books  of  an overseas  branch  of  the  Hong  Kong  financial  institution  or  a  special  purpose vehicle incorporated in an offshore regime.
11. The complexity of finance operations means that it is not possible to lay  down  one  comprehensive  formula  to  cover  all  situations.    Cases  falling between these two extremes will arise, where it can be said that the profits arise partly from business carried on in Hong Kong and partly from business carried on  elsewhere.    In  these  situations,  the  operations  that  are  more  immediately responsible for the receipt of the profits will determine their chargeability.    If those operations are carried on in Hong Kong, then, the whole of the profits will  be  assessable  here.    On  the  other  hand,  where  the  operations  more immediately responsible for the profits are undertaken outside of Hong Kong, then no part of those profits will be chargeable.    In the cases where the extent

and  effect  of  operations  undertaken  within  Hong  Kong  and  outside  of  Hong Kong are so finely balanced as to render it impracticable to determine which are the more immediately responsible, an apportionment of the profits will be appropriate.    The  current  basis  of  assessing  the  interest  income  of  financial institutions is set out in Revised Departmental Interpretation and Practice Note No. 21, issued in March 1998.

## DOUBLE TAXATION RELIEF

12. Section 16(1)(c) provides a limited form of double taxation relief to corporations and to all other persons carrying on a trade, profession or business in  Hong  Kong  in  respect  of  interest  or  gains  from  certificates  of  deposits  or bills  of  exchange  specified  in  section  15(1)(f),  (g),  (i),  (j),  (k)  or  (l).    When taxes  of  substantially  the  same  nature  as  tax  imposed  under  the  IRO  are charged elsewhere on such interest or gains then, provided the Commissioner is satisfied that the overseas taxes have been paid, a deduction is granted for those taxes in ascertaining the profits chargeable to profits tax.    Where the overseas tax  is  charged  on  the  gross  amount  of  earnings  and  is  payable  regardless  of whether  or  not  a  profit  is  derived  such  that  it  falls  outside  the  ambit  of  this relief,  then  a  deduction  will  be  considered  under  the  principal  provision  of section 16(1).